So I've been using the phrase live, and I've been talking about live roots.
But what does this actually mean?
What is a live root?
Well, a live root is a reference to an object from
something such as a stack frame.
The stack represents essentially the live running of the application,
so the stack across all threads.
So any references from variables on stack frames that are
referencing objects must be live references.
Any static variables.
So any static variables in the application that hold
references to objects, those static variables are not attached
to a particular instance or an object.
They're just there as essentially global variables.
Any objects referenced by static variables must also be kept alive.
And they're also some other references as well.
So if we're using, for example, the Java native interface,
if we're using synchronization monitors,
we'll be doing locking.
Those are live references as well.
So any object with a reference from a live root is kept alive during GC.
These references from live roots are followed.
So we have a reference to an object that's alive.
If it holds references to any other objects, those objects are also kept alive.
Remember that the garbage collector does not want to destroy any live objects.
We must follow any references from the root down through
all their child references until we find all the objects
that we now know are alive.
There's one other thing to think about here,
especially when we think about garbage collection in the young generation.
We may have a reference from a live root to an object
that's now in the old generation.
If that has a reference to an object in the young generation,
then we need to follow that reference to ensure that we don't
destroy that object in the young generation.
So here, in this simplified diagram, we have a root set,
and we have two live roots.
One references an object in the young generation and will follow
each reference and keep those objects alive.
Well that root set also has a reference to an object in the old generation,
and that itself then is a reference to an object in the young generation.
When we do a young garbage collect,
we don't want to remove the object from the young generation as
being referenced from the old generation.
So we need to make sure that that object is kept alive.
So this is an issue.
When we do a young generation garbage collect,
the garbage collector only looks at the references to
objects in the young generation, we route references to
objects in the young generation, i.e.
it ignores objects in the old generation.
And it does this for efficiency sake.
If we need to look at objects in the old generation,
then we may as well do a garbage collect in the old generation as well.
We have to load everything into memory.
We have to scan the entire memory set.
And this sort of defeats the purpose of having multiple
generations into which we can do garbage collections.
To fix this issue, we have something called a card table.
So what happens is this.
When a write to a reference to an object in the young generation happens,
these writes go through something called a write barrier.
The write barrier triggers code in the Java virtual machine,
and this code updates an entry in a table,
and these tables called card tables.
Each entry in the card table owns 512 bytes of memory.
So the idea is that if anything from that 512 bytes of memory is changed,
then the card table is updated.
On a minor GC, the card table is scanned, looking for any changed data.
That piece of memory is loaded, and any references in that memory are followed,
and those references are then marked as being in use.
So here we have a simplified picture of memory.
We're showing a young generation, an old generation, and the card table.
We're not showing any live roots here just to keep this simple.
So the idea now is that when an object in the old generation updates a
reference for an object in the young generation,
or, as we'll see here, allocates an object,
and that object is allocated into the young generation.
So it's something like this.
The object is allocated,
and the object in the old generation now has a reference that object.
When this happens,
that write to memory to allocate that object goes through a write barrier.
The Java VM manages the write barrier, and when it sees this write,
it updates the corresponding entry in a card table.
Again,
this happens for any write into the young generation. So if we
allocate another object in the young generation from something in the
old generation, then the write goes through a write barrier, the Java
VM manages the write barrier, and it again updates the corresponding
entry in the card table.
So now when the garbage collector runs and collects the young
generation, it starts with the live roots, follows those live roots to
any object in the young generation, follows any references from one
object in the young generation to another.
A young generation garbage collect doesn't look at
references to objects in the old generation.
Instead, what it does is it scans the card table.
If it finds any marked areas in the card table,
it loads the corresponding piece of memory and follows those references and marks those objects as being alive.